---
title: Terminology Every RF Engineer should know
tags:
  - fundamentals
project: substack
date_published: 
status: 🚧
final title: 5 Key Concepts Every RF Engineer should know
---


Most of RF engineering revolves around gain, noise, nonlinearity and efficiency. 

In a [previous article](https://www.viksnewsletter.com/p/understanding-two-port-amplifier?r=222kot&utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web), we discussed the various definitions of gain in detail. And noise in electrical systems is so fascinating, it deserves its own future article. 

In this post, we will focus on nonlinearity and efficiency definitions commonly used in RF systems, and look at some underlying mechanisms and subtleties.

**Here are the concepts you will learn:**

1. What is compression and why it occurs
    
2. Two-tone intermodulation, intercept points and their measurement
    
3. Two different definitions of amplifier efficiency and how they differ
    

Let’s begin!

---

### Compression

A linear amplifier will faithfully increase the level of the input signal without modifying the shape of the waveform. In practice, this is rarely the case. 

Amplifiers use field effect transistors (FETs) or bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) for amplification. Such transistors are inherently nonlinear. For example, one source of nonlinearity is the voltage-dependent capacitance arising from a transistor’s semiconductor junctions, which often resemble a nonlinear diode during operation. Depending on the input signal level, these nonlinearities cause distortion of the output signal.

#### The Frequency Domain Perspective

Let's think of this in the frequency domain. If you inject an amplifier with a pure signal at only one frequency, you would expect a higher output power at the same frequency and nothing else. This is almost true at a low input signal level, and we refer to this value as linear gain.

As you raise the level of the input signal, larger voltage swings in the transistor distort the signal to the point that it is no longer purely a single frequency signal. With some Fourier analysis (which we won’t do), we know that any deviations from a pure sinusoidal signal results in other harmonic frequency components whose weighted sum accurately represents the time-domain signal in the frequency domain.

As the level of input signal is further increased, the level of harmonics at the output increases till it is no longer negligible in magnitude compared to the fundamental signal. But where did these harmonic frequencies get their power from? 

Simple. It is transferred from the fundamental tone to the harmonic frequencies. As a result, the output power at the fundamental drops and the gain reduces. It is important to note that power is not actually “lost” during compression. It is merely redistributed from the fundamental to the harmonics.

If we pick an amount of gain drop, say 1 dB, we can define a metric that describes how much power an amplifier can handle before it stops behaving like a linear amplifier.

> The power level (at input or output) at which the gain of the amplifier is lower by 1 dB below linear gain is called compression point.

The choice of 1 dB is fairly arbitrary. Engineers use 0.1 dB or even 4 dB on occasion. The choice of linear gain as reference is also arbitrary. Some amplifiers have their gain increase before starting to enter compression. In such cases, peak gain is also a reasonable choice for reference gain.

#### The Supply Rails Perspective

Another popular way to look at amplifier compression is understanding the limitations of the power supply driving a circuit. If the output swing is so large that it is limited by the supply rails (voltage or current) the output power is also constrained and the overall gain drops. 

In any case, this ties in with the distortion perspective we looked at in the frequency domain. When swing is sufficiently large to “clip” the output waveform, the signal gets distorted, harmonics rise, power is taken away from the fundamental and gain drops.

If you have ever dealt with power amplifier design, then you’ll immediately recognize that this also depends on where the quiescent bias point for the amplifier is chosen. This takes us down a path of conduction angles and amplifier classes which is best left for a future article (we will run into this again when talking about efficiency.)

Subscribe and help support this newsletter! Get weekly RF articles via email.

### Nonlinearity

The easiest measure of linearity is the harmonic content generated by a component when injected with a single frequency tone. In fact, this is how RF front-end switches are often evaluated for linearity, and is rather intuitive to understand. Lower the harmonics a component generates, the more linear it is.

An alternative method is to use **two closely spaced tones as input** to an RF component, and is far more interesting to discuss.

#### Two-Tone Intermodulation, Intercept Points

In a [previous post](https://www.viksnewsletter.com/i/141523572/front-end-filtering), we discussed how in-band interference cannot be easily filtered by the RF front end due to limited filter selectivity. The RF component (like an amplifier) needs to tolerate the interference from a neighboring channel without irrecoverably destroying the desired signal. Characterizing nonlinearity using two tones emulates this scenario.

When an RF amplifier is fed with two closely spaced sinusoidal signals, they are both amplified at the output. In addition to the intended tones, power is generated at unintended frequencies due to the nonlinearity of the circuit. These newly generated frequency components are called **intermodulation (IM) products**.

IM products are a result of the mixing of two signals in a nonlinear system. With some trigonometry, it is possible to show that each of these IM products occur at a combination of the frequencies of the input tones. For simplicity, Fig? lists out the frequencies of the first five IM tones generated from a nonlinear mixing process.

As the input power is increased, the level of IM products also increase at a rate that depends on the order of nonlinearity. The 2nd order IM product will increase twice as fast as the fundamental, the 3rd order thrice as fast and so on. 

Now we can define a common linearity metric, **intercept point (IP)**, as:

> The input or output power level at which the Nth order IM product has the same power level as the fundamental tone is called the N-th order intercept point (IPN)

When referred to the input or output power, the linearity is called Input Intercept Point (IIP), or Output Intercept Point (OIP). It is quite common to look at the 2nd and 3rd IM products for amplifiers and mixers, and their corresponding linearity metrics will be listed as IIP2, OIP2, IIP3, and OIP3. The output and input referred intercept points only differ by the gain of the circuit.

#### Measuring Intercept Point

To measure intercept point, the input power cannot be increased to the point where the IM product has the same power as the fundamental tone. This is often too much power for the component to handle, and it would reach compression much before all this or get irreparably damaged.

Intercept points are always extracted from extrapolating a few measurements at low input power, fitting a line through the measurements and finding where these lines intersect. For convenience, many measurements in industry as made at a single input power, and intercept points are calculated assuming a 2:1 or 3:1 slope for 2nd and 3rd order components respectively. This is a matter of simple algebra, and the several handy equations are listed in Fig? should you need to use them.

Interestingly, the 1-dB compression point and IIP3 points are related on a first order basis. The 1-dB compression usually occurs about 10 dB before the IIP3. This can be 8-12 dB in practice, but it serves as a good sanity check to verify either measurement. If you are interested in why there is a 10 dB difference, check this out.

### Efficiency

While the term efficiency can be used in many contexts in an RF system, we will discuss power amplifier related efficiencies here.

In a power amplifier, efficiency refers to the ratio of the RF power delivered at the output to the DC power used to do it. Any loss of efficiency is due to energy dissipation due to heat.

You will commonly encounter two different efficiency definitions:

#### Drain/Collector Efficiency 

This efficiency definition stems from the calculation of power at the output terminal of an amplifying device and is a commonly used figure of merit in power transistors. The drain and collector are the output terminals of FET and Bipolar transistors.

> Drain/Collector efficiency is the ratio of the RF power at the output terminal to the DC power supplied to it.

In general, this definition of efficiency does not take input power into account. Depending on the gain of the amplifying device, this definition is misleading because the power transistor can have zero gain but high drain efficiency. This only means that all the input power is simply transferred to the output without amplification. You will still end up with a high efficiency number. 

If the amplifying device has a sufficiently high gain (> 30dB or 1000 times), then the input power is negligible compared to the output power and drain/collector efficiency is a useful and reasonable efficiency metric. 

There are other practical uses to this definition. In a multi-stage power amplifier, it is usually the output stage that has the highest efficiency. But it is difficult to measure how much input power is fed into it because it is integrated with other amplifying stages. In such a case, it is only reasonable to calculate efficiency from the output power alone. It is quite likely that gain is sufficiently high in a multi-stage amplifier anyway.

#### Power Added Efficiency (PAE)

Power added efficiency or PAE is a much better definition for lower gain amplifiers, and is defined as:

> Power added efficiency is the ratio of the amount of excess power generated by the amplifier relative to the input power, to its DC power consumption.

By accounting for the input power in the calculation, we take into account the gain of the device as well. A low gain device cannot have a great efficiency, since after all, not much amplification is happening for the DC power being consumed. 

Again for sufficiently high gain (>30 dB), the drain/collector efficiency and PAE should be quite close. PAE can also be calculated from drain efficiency if the gain G is known according to (formula).

#### Improving efficiency

Efficiency improvement in power amplifiers is a vast topic of research interest. And rightly so, because it is a key contributor to maintaining your phone’s battery life while making a call. From a high level, we can look at what affects efficiency in three different ways:

1. **Class of amplifier operation**: Depending on where the amplifier is biased, and for what percentage of the sinusoidal waveform the device is actually conducting, the efficiency greatly differs, varying from 30% all the way to 90% and above. In addition, there are various sophisticated switching techniques and output waveform shaping techniques all geared towards increasing efficiency.
    
2. **Load impedance:** For a given class of operation, there is an optimum load when presented to the amplifying devices, delivers maximum efficiency. “Load-pull” measurements are utilized to find this optimum point, where the PAE is continuously measured for various load impedances to find the maximum point.
    
3. **Circuit techniques**: There are also ways to dynamically change the supply voltage using [envelope tracking to minimize wasted power](https://www.viksnewsletter.com/p/envelope-tracking-for-efficient-power?r=222kot&utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web). Doherty amplifiers drive efficiency gains by using a parallel “peaking” amplifier, and other techniques like outphasing are also used to drive efficiencies higher.

[[Excalidraw/Compression_Nonlinearity_Efficiency.excalidraw|Compression_Nonlinearity_Efficiency.excalidraw]]
