## Metadata
* URL: [https://www.newyorker.com/science/elements/how-food-powers-your-body-metabolism-calories](url)
* Author: James Somers
* Publisher: The New Yorker
* Published Date: 2022-10-25
* Tags: 

## Highlights
* Szent-Györgyi is often credited with saying that life is nothing but an electron looking for a place to rest;
* Glucose is like a chemical shipping container. It is an ideal electron transporter, in part because it is high-capacity, conveniently shaped, and easily opened up. It’s also unusually soluble, which means that it travels well through the bloodstream.
* Our brains, whose parts have especially unpredictable energy requirements—as neurons fire, they create spikes in demand—depend almost exclusively on glucose for energy.
* When glucose reaches our cells, it is—unlike a shipping container—dismantled systematically. A series of reactions strips its highest-energy electrons and uses them to form a small “carrier molecule” known as an NADH. If glucose is like a shipping container, then NADHs are like delivery trucks. The process of loading the electrons into the trucks is called glycolysis.
* When glycolysis occurs in the absence of oxygen, it is known as fermentation. If your muscles are pushed to their limit and there’s not enough oxygen in your bloodstream, your cells ferment glucose as a stopgap measure for energy production.
* Oxygen is so hungry for electrons—its outer shell needs only two more to get a complete set—that in effect it pulls them all the way through the Krebs cycle, which is the real powerhouse of our metabolism.
* energy-rich electrons are peeled off and loaded up onto yet more NADHs—far more than in glycolysis alone.
* mitochondria—structures believed to have descended from a free-floating bacterium that was ingested by one of our ancestors long ago and coöpted.
* A mitochondrion is divided into an internal and external chamber by a convoluted border with many folds, which create a huge surface area. Proteins protrude from this membrane like rabbits poking their heads through a hedge. These proteins capture an NADH, then pull its electrons through to the inner chamber, where they finally come to rest in molecules of oxygen.
* At the moment that the protein pulls each electron inward, it also disgorges the proton, pushing it from the internal chamber to the external one. This extrusion happens everywhere across the membrane. The result is that many positively charged protons build up outside, separated by a wall from the negatively charged electrons held inside. An electrical field comes into being. Quite literally, each mitochondrion becomes a battery, waiting to discharge.
* The electrical field generated by the process, he explains, has a strength of around thirty million volts per metre—“equivalent to a bolt of lightning across every square nanometre of membrane.”
* Pulled by the electrical current, they desperately want to get back to the inside of the mitochondrion, where the electrons are. Their only way back, however, is to squeeze through tiny mushroom-shaped conduits that litter the membrane. In 1962, scientists discovered that these conduits are actually little turbines. Seen in minute detail through electron microscopes, they resemble waterwheels; the protons turn them as they pass.
* each turn of the wheel assembles a molecule of adenosine triphosphate, or ATP—the energy currency of our cells.
* By dint of its structure, ATP is extremely willing to give up its energy, but it is prevented from doing so by a few precisely controllable molecular speed bumps—like
* each molecule of ATP is endowed with a standard amount of energy, created by the physical motion of a molecular gear. ATP is used in every kind of cell, where it’s converted into kinetic, chemical, or electrical energy.
* Metabolism achieves something miraculous: through painstaking atomic transformations, it extracts from practically any organic chemical a universal unit of energy, deployable in every corner of every cell, and it does this while wasting nothing.
* The Warburg effect describes the peculiar fact that cancer cells tend to behave as if they’re in a metabolic emergency. When normal cells are short on oxygen, the mitochondrial turbines slow; anaerobic glycolysis, or fermentation, takes over. What’s strange is that cancer cells do this even when oxygen is abundant. The Warburg effect is considered almost universal across cancers; one relatively common sign of a tumor’s presence is a buildup of lactate, caused by the cancer cells fermenting. It’s unclear whether this fermentation is a cause or consequence of the disease. Do cancer cells ferment because they are growing out of control—or is fermentation driving the growth?
* He argues that it might explain the outsized correlation between cancer and aging.
* A popular hypothesis holds that the root cause of this mounting risk is the accumulation of genetic mutations.
* rate of accumulation isn’t nearly fast enough to explain the extraordinary trajectory that cancer risk takes over a lifetime.
* As you age, your mitochondria accumulate wear and tear. Often, the cause is inflammation—whether from disease, injury, or periods of stress. Inflammation itself becomes chronic with age, for reasons that are still not entirely understood.
* Meanwhile, a process known as mitophagy, in which old mitochondria are eaten by the body so that new ones can grow in their place, slows down. The result of all this is that our mitochondria get tired, and do a slightly worse job.
* The conditions grow ripe for cancer: mitochondrial waste products start to pile up, as at a broken assembly line; perhaps, if it gets bad enough, a cell might believe that the backup is due to a lack of oxygen.
* In that mode, when glucose arrives, the priority becomes stripping it not for its high-energy electrons but for molecular building blocks. The cell reverts to one of its earliest programs, active during embryonic development, in which the prime directive is not to work but to grow.
* The impression I got from “Transformer” was that the Krebs cycle was the key not just to life and its origins but to aging, cancer, and death. More likely it is just a part of all those things.
