---
title: "401k"
date: "2023-01-28 17:55"
topic: finance
tentative title: 8 THINGS you should be doing to have $1 Million in your 401K
---

Have you ever wondered if you're doing all the right things in your 401k for a secure retirement? In this video, we will go look at 8 things you should be doing in your 401k that will ensure your retirement savings exceed a million dollars, and even show you ways to contribute up to $66,000 per year in your 401k. Let's get started.

1. Start Early, Start Now
	1.  To truly reap the benefits of compound interest, you should start investing in a 401k as early as you can. In my early 20s, I believed that I am "too young" to start investing for retirement, so I acutally intentionally setup my 401k contributions to 0% so that I can have more take home pay. It's not until my early 30s, that I actually realized that I should be contributing to a 401k all along, and have been putting away as much as i can ever since.
	2. It is said, "The best time to plant a tree was 20 years ago, and the second best time is now"? If like me, you haven't got started yet, there is no better time to start than now. Starting late means that you have to put away even more per month to reach your retirement goals. (start_investing_early.png)
2. . Minimize your taxes
		1. By contributing to a 401k, you will pay lesser taxes to the government in any given year due to what is called a "pre-tax deduction". Let's look at an example of what that means.
		2. Lets say you make \$100,000 in a year, and say you effectively pay  20% or $20,000 in taxes.
		3. Assuming you contributed 10% of your income to a 401k, or $10,000, that means 10% of your income is deducted from your income *before* taxes are calculated. Which means that you pay taxes on $100K-10K = $90K.
		4. At a 20% effective tax rate, you would be paying $18K in taxes instead of $20K without 401k contributions.
		5. So by contributing to a 401k, you've really made yourself $2K extra by not forking it over to the government.  In reality, your tax rate might be lower after you contribute to a 401k. Lets say you only pay 18% effective taxes, so you pay $16.2K in taxes. You have now saved $3.8K in taxes. And effectively, you are paying only 16.2K/100K = 16.2% effective tax rate instead of 20%.
		6. If you are fortunate to make enough, or live well below your means to sock away the maximum allowed contribution to a 401k, which is $22,500 in 2023, then this is the amount that you should contribute to get the maximum tax savings in any given year.
		7. If you are over the age of 50, you  get to contribute another $7500 as "catch-up contributions" for a maximum of $30,000
3. Get your matching contributions
			1. Several employers match the 401k contributions of their employees up to a certain limit. 
			2. For example, your employer might say that they match $1 for every $1 contributed up to 5% of your salary. So if you make $100,000, and contribute 10% (or $10K) to your 401k in the year, the company will match every dollar up to 5% of your salary, or $5K. In this example, you will get an extra $5K into your 401k contribution.
			3. In reality, many companies use a tiered system where they contribute lets say $1 for every $1 up to $3000, $0.5 for every $1 thereafter, which makes the calculation more complex, but in essense you still get more money into your 401k by getting the company match
			4. What is more amazing about the company match is that it is not limited by the $22,500 401k limit mentioned earlier. The company's contributions will help you save more than the 401k limit. So if the company match was an extra $5K,  your annual contributions will go up to (22.5+5)=27.5K or (30+5)=35K if you're older than 50. Now, there is still another option that allows you to reach $66,000 in annual 401k contributions, stick around to find out.
			5. Should you not contribute to a 401k if you don't have a company match? No, the company match is just an added benefit. Contributing to a 401k still does save on taxes and is worth doing just for that sake. But if you do have a company match, at least contribute enough to get the free money!
4. Save at least 10% of your income
		1. Fundamentally, the contribution rates comes down to how much you can afford to put away, and what your monthly expenses are. So it would be best to first examine how much money you need every month to cover your needs from mortgage or rent, to groceries, childcare, medical, or discretionary expenses.
		2. Even if you do enroll in a 401k but don't get around to actually setting the percentage deduction, your employer will most likely auto-deduct a default percentage from your paycheck and this is often in the range of 2%. This is a really good move in my opinion, because we will immediately start saving small amounts of money even if inertia gets the better of us and we don't get around to setting percentages in a 401k.
		3. If you do get around it, and if your monthy budget permits, it is generally recommended that you save at least 10% of your paycheck in a 401k. Obviously, the more the better, but that should be a good start.
5. Enroll in Continuous Increase Program
	1. As time rolls on, you want to make sure that you increase the amount of money you save in a 401k. For this reason, many employers do provide a continuous increase program where you can set what % your 401k contribution should increase every year. A good idea here is to set it to annually increase 1-2%, so that in about 5 years you are now saving 15-20% of your paycheck and well on your way to financial freedom.
6. Invest in Diversified, Low Cost Mutual Funds
	1. The simple and efficient option is to invest in target date funds. These are mutual funds that are generally well diversified, which means that they hold a broad spectrum of stocks and bonds so that you don't put all your eggs in one basket.  They also have a low expense ratio, which means that it costs you very little to buy and hold this fund till your retirement date. For example, if you decide to retire in 2060, the Vanguard Target Retirement 2060 Fund (VTTSX) is an excellent choice from Vanguard. It has returned over 8% on the average over the last 10 years, and it has an expense ratio of 0.08%, which means that you will not give up much of your investment returns in the form of fees. Simply buying and holding such a fund for a long time will ensure that you are underway to building a secure nest egg.
	2. Create your own 3-fund portfolio
		1. If you don't have access to a target date fund in your list of available choices in your 401k, you can create your own by buying the right mix of index funds in your 401k. Index funds hold a large number of individual stock holdings and gives you a diversified portfolio. For example, to emulate the 2060 retirement fund, you can simply buy 54% of a total stock market index fund, 36% of a total international index fund, and 10% of a total bond fund. This distribution of percentages is called an Asset Allocation. And, a good rule of thumb is to set your bond holdings to (Age-10) and allocate the rest to a mix of total and international stock funds. So if you are in your 20s, holding anywhere between 10-15% in bonds is a good choice.
		2.  Adding in variations with tilts and REITs
			1. If you want to get even more granular in your investment choices, you may choose to "tilt" your portfolio towards certain high risk, high reward choices. For example, you can choose to tilt towards smaller companies which provide more growth but at the cost of more fluctuations over time. In other words, it is more risky and volatile. You can choose to overweight your portfolio with a mutual fund like Vanguard Small Cap Index Fund (VSMAX) which focuses on smaller companies.
			2. Or you could choose to add some real estate investments in your portfolio by holding what are called REITS (or Real Estate Investment Trusts) which allows you to invest in mostly commercial real estate. Many people do choose to add REITs in their portfolio, because it is somewhat unrelated to stocks and can provide good balance and diversification in a portfolio. An example of a low cost REIT is Vanguard REIT Index Fund (VGSIX).
7. Avoid Withdrawing from a 401k
	1. So now you've invested and grown your money for many years in a 401k. But when can you access it? According to IRS rules in 2023, you will be able to withdraw your money penalty free only when you are 59.5 years old. Pulling out your money any earlier than that will result in a 10% penalty for withdrawal, unless you satisfy the IRS exceptions to this rule. So if you are planning to retire earlier than 59.5, make sure that you have funds outside of your 401k, till you are old enough to withdraw penalty free from your 401k
	2. 401k loans
		1. Assuming withdrawal is not an option due to the penalties involved, but life circumstances require you to pull out some money for emergency expenses, you have the option to take a loan out of your 401k. This depends on your employer too, but typically you can pull out up to 50% of your savings up to $50,000 in a given year. You will have to pay that borrowed money back, with interest, within 5 years of taking the loan. You don't pay early withdrawal penalties this way, unless you default on your 401k loan, or quit your current employment in which case you will have to pay it back on a much shorter time frame.
8. Invest in the after-tax 401k
	1. If you do have a really good source of income, the IRS does allow you to make what are called "After-Tax 401k" contributions up to $66,000 in 2023, which includes your original $22.5K traditional 401k and any company matching dollars. These contributions do not help you with reducing taxes like a traditional 401k, however.
	2. If there is no tax benefit, then why would you invest in this? The reason is that any earnings on after-tax 401k are not taxed till you actually withdraw from it, at which time you might be in a lower tax bracket. As they say, "taxes deferred is taxes saved"
	3. Some employers do allow you to convert after-tax contributions to a Roth 401k, which means that your earnings can grow and be distributed completely tax free!
	4. This can start getting complicated, so if you would like to know more about traditional, roth and after-tax 401ks, do let me know in the comments below for a future video.

I hope you learned something new in this video. If you found it helpful, click the like button and subscribe to the channel. It really helps us create more content. Until then, happy investing!

References
- https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-automatic-enrollment
- https://money.usnews.com/investing/investing-101/articles/2018-07-23/9-charts-showing-why-you-should-invest-today
- https://investor.vanguard.com/investment-products/mutual-funds/profile/vttsx#
- https://investor.vanguard.com/investment-products/mutual-funds/profile/vsmax

Ideas:
- put in a graphic on the side that shows how much of the 401k is filling up, up to $66K